extended article about Laminas CI (#193)
laminas/getlaminas.org: data/blog/2024/2024-08-05-using-laminas-continuous-integration.md

Note that the job matrix generator is smart enough to ignore jobs that are not relevant to the affected items in your changes; if you only updated markdown files, then only markdown linting jobs will be run, or, if you've updated PHP code, your PHPUnit test suite will be run for all supported PHP versions listed in your `composer.json`.
This ensures that the job matrix is as effective and efficient as possible, while still offering a solid review.

Each of the above jobs takes its **configuration settings** straight from your project:

- **PHP version**
- **Additional extensions**
- **php.ini settings**
- **dependency** - lowest, locked, or latest

Once the job has the above values, it **runs a command** which is the actual QA check.

The automated process returns a result for each job.
If you get any errors, the job is marked as failed.
You may be able to fix some of the errors automatically in your local code e.g. via phpcs and psalm specific commands (phpcbf and psalter, respectively) while others need to be investigated manually.
Only when all errors are resolved do you get the coveted green check mark. And a good night's sleep, of course.

### Conclusions

> Laminas CI in a CI pipeline can be advantageous, especially for projects built with the Laminas//Mezzio microframework, but also for any other framework or library, given its broad range.

Reviewer: > Laminas//Mezzio microframework

What is meant here and why two backslashes?

Author: It happens to use here and there 3 backslashes, as a reminder of laminas logo
Laminas///Mezzio
I rephrase it now

Reviewer: > It happens to use here and there 3 backslashes, as a reminder of laminas logo

We have never done that.

Author: I did that in dotkernel related materials :-)

This ensures that the job matrix is as effective and efficient as possible, while still offering a solid review.

Each of the above jobs takes its **configuration settings** straight from your project:

- **PHP version**
- **Additional extensions**
- **php.ini settings**
- **dependency** - lowest, locked, or latest

Once the job has the above values, it **runs a command** which is the actual QA check.

The automated process returns a result for each job.
If you get any errors, the job is marked as failed.
You may be able to fix some of the errors automatically in your local code e.g. via phpcs and psalm specific commands (phpcbf and psalter, respectively) while others need to be investigated manually.
Only when all errors are resolved do you get the coveted green check mark. And a good night's sleep, of course.

### Conclusions

Laminas CI in a CI pipeline can be beneficial, especially for projects built with the Mezzio microframework or using Laminas components.

> It's valuable for any other framework or library, given its broad range.

Reviewer: I would turn it around: it is not only suitable for the projects of Laminas, but has been created from the beginning for universal use in various PHP projects.

Author: take a look now

Only when all errors are resolved do you get the coveted green check mark. And a good night's sleep, of course.

### Conclusions

Laminas CI in a CI pipeline can be advantageous, especially for projects built with the Laminas//Mezzio microframework, but also for any other framework or library, given its broad range.

- **The CI pipeline can be optimized for PHP-specific tasks** because Laminas is designed specifically for PHP applications. 
  The tasks range from dependency management with Composer, to code style checks, to running PHPUnit tests.
- Seamless **integration with Common CI/CD tools** like GitHub CI/CD, GitHub Actions, Jenkins and others.
- **Composer integration** ensures consistent dependency management across different environments, from development to production, which is crucial for maintaining stability and reliability.
- Laminas encourages **modern PHP practices** by enforcing PSR (PHP Standard Recommendation) compliance and the use of dependency injection.
- Extensive **Documentation and Community Support**

### More on the topic:

> - [Laminas CI Automation](https://mwop.net/blog/2021-03-12-laminas-ci.html)
> - [Laminas Continuous Integration Action on GitHub](https://github.com/laminas/laminas-continuous-integration-action)
> - [GitHub Action: Laminas CI Integration](https://getlaminas.org/blog/2023-11-28-laminas-and-mezzio-supports-php-83.html)
> - [PHP Installer for Extensions using Laminas CI](https://github.com/php/pie/blob/main/.github/workflows/continuous-integration.yml)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [Blog post by Matthew Weier O'Phinney: "Laminas CI Automation"](https://mwop.net/blog/2021-03-12-laminas-ci.html)
- [Repository of Laminas Continuous Integration Action on GitHub](https://github.com/laminas/laminas-continuous-integration-action)
```

You may be able to fix some of the errors automatically in your local code e.g. via phpcs and psalm specific commands (phpcbf and psalter, respectively) while others need to be investigated manually.
Only when all errors are resolved do you get the coveted green check mark. And a good night's sleep, of course.

### Conclusions

Using Laminas CI in a CI pipeline can be beneficial for any framework or library, given its broad range.
It usually takes less than a minute to receive the feedback that turns iterating on patches into a breeze, which means you can release easily and release often.
Its high value is guaranteed by the authors of the Mezzio microframework and Laminas components, the people who best understand the ins and outs of those code bases.
They expanded their initial CI workflow multiple times, based on their needs, while ensuring that the flow has universal application for any PHP project.

- **The CI pipeline can be optimized for PHP-specific tasks** because Laminas is designed specifically for PHP applications. 
  The tasks range from dependency management with Composer, to code style checks, to running PHPUnit tests.

> - Seamless **integration with Common CI/CD tools** like GitHub CI/CD, GitHub Actions, Jenkins and others.

Author: > If you have successfully used the CI containers inside Jenkins or Gitlab, please ignore this comment, but I'm not aware of the container having ever been run outside of GHA (??)

Indeed, is working only on GHA

---
id: 2024-08-05-using-laminas-continuous-integration.md
author: julian
title: 'Using Laminas Continuous Integration'
draft: false
public: true
created: '2024-08-05T11:00:00-01:00'
updated: '2024-08-05T11:00:00-01:00'
tags:
  - continuous integration
---

**Continuous Integration (CI)** involves the frequent **merging of code updates** from developers into a shared
codebase.
This can be done as often as those updates are ready to be reviewed. Once the CI process is finalized,

> **Continuous Delivery** automatically **deploys the code** to the production environment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Continuous Delivery (CD)** automatically **deploys the code** to the production environment.
```

> This flow streamlines the development process for faster and more reliable releases.

Reviewer: We use the following writing style in the documentation. I think that would also help here.

> ## One Sentence per-line Method
> 
> Documentation should be written using [the one sentence per-line method](https://asciidoctor.org/docs/asciidoc-recommended-practices/#one-sentence-per-line). 
> There are a number of excellent reasons for writing in this style, including:
> 
> - It prevents reflows (meaning a change early in the paragraph won’t cause the remaining lines in the paragraph to reposition)
> - You can easily swap/move sentences
> - You can easily separate or join paragraphs
> - You can comment out sentences or add commentary to them
> - You can spot sentences which are too long or sentences that vary widely in length
> - You can spot redundant (and thus mundane) patterns in your writing
> 
> Take the following content as an example.
> 
> ```markdown
> The concrete `TableGateway` object uses constructor injection for getting
> dependencies and options into the instance. The table name and an instance of
> an `Adapter` are all that is required to create an instance. Out of the box, this 
> implementation makes no assumptions about table structure or metadata, and 
> when `select()` is executed, a simple `ResultSet` object with the populated 
> `Adapter`'s `Result` (the datasource) will be returned and ready for iteration.
> ```
> 
> While it can be easily read in any editor, as it does not require the reader to scroll, that simplicity comes at the cost of maintainability. 
> For example, if you needed to put the second sentence before the first, or move it to any other location, it would need to be cut out of the surrounding paragraph before it could be moved.
> 
> Compare that with the following sample content.
> 
> ```markdown
> The concrete `TableGateway` object uses constructor injection for getting dependencies and options into the instance. 
> The table name and an instance of an `Adapter` are all that is required to create an instance.
> Out of the box, this implementation makes no assumptions about table structure or metadata, and when `select()` is executed, a simple `ResultSet` object with the populated `Adapter`'s `Result` (the datasource) will be returned and ready for iteration.
> ```
> 
> Yes, the content, by default scrolls out of view. 
> However, most text editors and IDEs support "_soft wrapping_", making this a non-issue. 
> Using this approach, the sentence doesn't need to be extracted from the surrounding paragraph before it can be moved.

<!--- EXTENDED -->

If you only have a handful of codebases, you may be able to handle their maintenance manually, but the automated
solution is just around the corner. Take the [Laminas Project](https://github.com/laminas), for example.

It has around 200 repositories between the main project and Mezzio. Maintaining all of that code, from bug fixes to
patches, from improvements to releases is a titanic task. Laminas CI is designed to help maintainers and developers
review, merge and release updates rapidly and with fewer headaches. Wouldn't you rather sleep soundly at night knowing
that your code has been checked by a tireless, objective reviewer? Laminas CD will be the topic of a future article, so
let's focus on Laminas CI.

### Can I use Laminas CI in my own projects?

Of course! Any project or package can benefit from using CI, especially Laminas CI which is designed to be universal
and easy to install.
You can grab it from [**Github Marketplace**](https://github.com/marketplace/actions/laminas-continuous-integration).

> We will cover the implementation in the next chapter. **DotKernel API** is one of the many organizations that use

Reviewer: > …is one of the many organizations…

Can we name any others here? A popular name would be helpful.

Reviewer 2: `php/pie` is one example: https://github.com/php/pie/blob/main/.github/workflows/continuous-integration.yml

Laminas
components, so it makes perfect sense to trigger Laminas CI for each code update, as can be
seen [here](https://github.com/dotkernel/api/tree/5.0/.github/workflows).

### How to implement the Laminas CI pipeline

A generic approach to CI is to use GitLab CI/CD, a built-in continuous integration, delivery, and deployment feature of

> GitLab that allows you to configure your own pipeline of jobs, stages and scripts. This still means that you have to

Reviewer 2: Why talk about GitLab here? the CI workflow only works on GHA AFAIK

know what you are doing, so an excellent choice is the Laminas CI implementation which does most of the heavy lifting

> for you. It generates a matrix of jobs for Git Actions based on your project's configuration, then runs the jobs and

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
for you. It generates a matrix of jobs for GitHub Actions based on your project configuration, runs the jobs and
```

provides feedback.

> The first file you need to create is `.github/workflows/continuous-integration.yml` using the content below. It needs to
> be used in the GitHub Events that trigger workflows. You can check out the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Create the file `.github/workflows/continuous-integration.yml` using the content below.
In this example, the workflow will run for all pull requests, pushes to any branch, and newly published tags. You can check out the
```

> documentation [here](https://docs.github.com/en/actions/using-workflows/about-workflows).

Reviewer: Never user "here" as link text, use meaningful text to describe the target page: https://www.w3.org/WAI/tips/writing/#make-link-text-meaningful

```yaml
name: "Continuous Integration"

on:
  pull_request:
  push:
    branches:
    tags:

jobs:
  ci:
    uses: laminas/workflow-continuous-integration/.github/workflows/continuous-integration.yml@1.x
```

In DotKernel, when pushing PHP code for review, Laminas CI generates a series of automated processes which are designed
to:

> - Check **linting** using phpcs based on phpcs.xml (phpcs.xml.dist can also be used).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Check **code style and formatting** using PHP Code Sniffer based on phpcs.xml (phpcs.xml.dist can also be used).
```

> - Check **linting** using phpcs based on phpcs.xml (phpcs.xml.dist can also be used).
> - Run the battery of **tests** using PHPUnit based on phpunit.xml (phpunit.xml.dist can also be used).
> - Run **static analysis** to detect bugs and check that best programming practices are respected using psalm based on
>   psalm.xml (psalm.xml.dist can also be used).

Reviewer: The filenames must be enclosed in backticks (`):

```suggestion
- Check **linting** using phpcs based on `phpcs.xml` (`phpcs.xml.dist` can also be used).
- Run the battery of **tests** using PHPUnit based on `phpunit.xml` (`phpunit.xml.dist` can also be used).
- Run **static analysis** to detect bugs and check that best programming practices are respected using psalm based on
  `psalm.xml` (`psalm.xml.dist` can also be used).
```

> - Run **yamllint and markdownlint** for `docs?/book/**/*.md` files and mkdocs.yml.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Run **yamllint and markdownlint** for `docs/book/**/*.md` files and `mkdocs.yml`.
```

> A full list of its capabilities is listed [here](https://github.com/laminas/laminas-ci-matrix-action). Check it out to

Reviewer: The same: do not use "here" for a link text.

see what items it can identify based on the configuration files you include in your project.

Based on your project and the files you update in a given push, you can expect to see a **job matrix** like the one
below:

- Documentation Linting [8.2, latest]
- MkDocs Linting [8.2, latest]
- PHPUnit [8.2, lowest]
- PHPUnit [8.2, latest]
- PHPUnit [8.3, lowest]

> - PHPUnit [8.3, latest]

Reviewer: Please add version 8.4.

See: https://github.com/laminas/laminas-ci-matrix-action/releases/tag/1.27.0

- PHPCodeSniffer [8.2, latest]
- Psalm [8.2, latest]

> Note that the job matrix generator is smart enough to ignore jobs that are not relevant to the affected items in your
> update. PHPCodeSniffer may be missing if you only updated .md files and only relevant PHP versions will be used by
> PHPUnit. This ensures that the job matrix is as effective and efficient as possible, while still offering a solid

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Note that the job matrix generator is smart enough to ignore jobs that are not relevant to the affected items in your changes; if you only updated markdown files, then only markdown linting jobs will be run, or, if you've updated PHP code, your PHPUnit test suite will be run for all supported PHP versions listed in your `composer.json`.
This ensures that the job matrix is as effective and efficient as possible, while still offering a solid
```

coveted green check mark. And a good night's sleep, of course.

### Conclusions

Laminas CI in a CI pipeline can be advantageous, especially for projects built with the Laminas//Mezzio framework, but
also for any other framework, given its broad range.

- **The CI pipeline can be optimized for PHP-specific tasks** because Laminas is designed specifically for PHP
  applications. The tasks range from dependency management with Composer, to code style checks, to running PHPUnit
  tests.
- Seamless **integration with Common CI/CD tools** like GitLab CI/CD, GitHub Actions, Jenkins and others.
- **Composer integration** ensures consistent dependency management across different environments, from development to
  production, which is crucial for maintaining stability and reliability.
- Laminas encourages **modern PHP practices** by enforcing PSR (PHP Standard Recommendation) compliance and the use of
  dependency injection.
- Extensive **Documentation and Community Support**

### More on the topic:

- [https://mwop.net/blog/2021-03-12-laminas-ci.html](https://getlaminas.org/blog/2023-11-28-laminas-and-mezzio-supports-php-83.html)

> - [https://github.com/laminas/laminas-continuous-integration-action](https://getlaminas.org/blog/2023-11-28-laminas-and-mezzio-supports-php-83.html)

Reviewer 2: The link label here doesn't match the target url

> - [https://getlaminas.org/blog/2023-11-28-laminas-and-mezzio-supports-php-83.html](https://getlaminas.org/blog/2023-11-28-laminas-and-mezzio-supports-php-83.html)

Reviewer: 1. wrong link
2. please find better link text
